welcome to topcast and for a standalone
episode on objective knowledge now papa
wrote a book of the same name called
objective knowledge which was a
collection of essays but today i'm not
going to be quoting anything from the
book objective knowledge similarly david
deutsch writes about objective knowledge
but likewise i'm not going to be quoting
anything from the work of david deutch
instead this is going to be a summary of
what i now understand objective
knowledge to be
and i'm going to compare it to other
visions of epistemology that are out
there before we get into objective
knowledge it's worth setting the scene
it's worth understanding what this
notion of objectivity is all about to
begin with so let's begin there part one
objectivity when something is described
as objective it means that there is a
truth of the matter about it independent
of what anyone thinks feels or believes
on the topic
so for example independent of what
anyone thinks the earth is the third
planet from the sun atoms of lithium
contain three protons one plus two
equals three and the triple alpha
process for carbon fusion requires three
nuclei of helium now standing apart from
any of that are claims such as the music
of mozart is more enjoyable than that of
beethoven or a good seafood buffet is
preferable to any michelin star formal
dining experience
and no matter how good teslas get the
driving experience will never match that
of an australian holden commodore
all of those claims are subjective there
exists a component of the claim that
depends entirely on what an individual
person believes thinks or feels what
their personal perceptions are do
oysters taste nice
some will wretch at the thought others
like myself have never found the number
of oysters to ever be sufficient
they're delicious
or are they actually delicious
are they actually delicious to me or in
some objective sense
well here is where we get into that
slightly tricky distinction between what
john searle identified as the two senses
of objectivity versus subjectivity on
the one hand we have this notion of
objectivity being as i described about
facts of the matter where the earth is
what particular numbers add up to how
many protons there may be in a given
atomic nucleus the answers to these
matters are independent of people's
thoughts they are out there in the world
so to speak but other things are subject
to personal taste
the deliciousness of oysters a
preference for one style of music over
another this is called the
epistemological distinction between
subjectivity and objectivity but now
there's a curiosity that appears because
if we just focus for a moment on my
claim that oysters are delicious well
that is an objective claim an objective
fact about me
an objective claim about my subjective
experience an objective claim about my
subjectivity
my subjectivity is in a sense me it is
my experience it exists independent of
what i think about it i am just
presented with deliciousness of oyster
each time i pop one into my mouth as i
am repulsed by the odor of certain
french cheeses these are objective facts
about me and my preferences but it seems
like my preferences are not out there in
the world of objects but rather they're
in my mind in other words there is a
world of objects out there the objective
world and there is also a world of
subjects the subjective world namely the
contents of people's minds their
conscious experience of the world is a
world of subjectivity and there are true
and false claims we can make about that
subjective world of experience
what this means is that we have an
epistemological distinction to make
between these two words objective and
subjective namely the former objective
are about claims that could be true or
false right or wrong independent of
anyone's preferences and the latter
subjective claims are literally your
preferences there is not a single strict
right or wrong universally for everyone
are oysters delicious well there is no
objective answer that is true
independent of the thoughts of a mind
and experiences of a person you have to
ask an individual but then there is an
ontological distinction too the
ontological distinction is that there is
a world of objects and a world of
subjects never mind the claims about
planets and numbers and protons those
things are objects out there in the
world and then there are people's
preferences tastes experiences their
internal sensation of blue when they
look at the sky and so on that is a
subjective world and we can make true or
false claims about it i find oysters
delicious is a claim about my
ontologically subjective world and it is
a factual claim which could be true or
false i could be lying after all but
that claim therefore becomes
epistemologically objective it's true or
false and it's about my subjectivity so
sometimes we can be entirely objective
about our subjectivity if something is
subjective it does not mean it is not
truthful or factual but it can mean it
is about a particular individual this
distinction of objective and subjective
in john surl's sense is actually just a
limiting case of karl popper's three
worlds that he distinguished between and
i'm going to pretty much pass over it
with very little comment popper's worlds
include well world one that are about
the world of objects that i've already
mentioned planets protons pi both kinds
of pi the number and the lemon meringue
or the meat kind this is the ontological
objective world
world two for popper is the subjective
world of mental processes so our
experience of stuff john searle's world
of ontological subjectivity this is the
ontologically subjective world world too
and world three world three is the world
of ideas and theories and explanations
the relationships we can write down or
articulate about worlds 1 and worlds 2
mainly world one this is where the
theory of planetary orbits is to be
found the theory itself is not an object
it's not like the orbit itself there is
the reality of the planet and its orbit
world one and then there is the theory
of or the explanation of or our
knowledge about the orbit
world three
world 3 matches world 1 with more or
less error and we expect it to improve
over time as our explanations do as we
correct errors
when we look at a planet moving across
the sky through a telescope we are
having an experience of the planet
that's world two
now to what extent world three our
theories and explanations affect world
two our experiences well let's save that
for another time but those are poppa's
world so in a sense he got there before
searle and like i say i'm going to pass
over it without any more comment
but all of this talk about subjective
and objective brings me to
part two of this podcast
objective knowledge proper this
objective knowledge this is world three
really the world of theories and
explanations it's the world of objective
knowledge genuine objective knowledge is
objective in both senses or at least it
can be
poppa's epistemology is an explanation
of objective knowledge that goes beyond
the objectivity claimed by other
epistemologies out there which when
they're analyzed always fall into some
form of subjectivity or both kinds of
subjectivity sometimes and i'll come
back to that poppa's epistemology
explains that our knowledge of reality
our scientific historic moral
mathematical and philosophical
explanations
they are objective that epistemology is
about objective knowledge objective
knowledge in the sense that it can be an
object itself that transforms the world
around us but it also is out there in
the objective world as part of world one
in the sense that it is instantiated in
objects it is objective because for
example a telescope contains within it
the knowledge the relationships between
the lenses and the mirrors of a
telescope are the same as the
relationships that the telescope builder
or designer has written down or that the
astronomer has instantiated in their
minds of how to collect and focus light
those are mathematical relationships
that have a one-to-one correspondence
between what happens in the telescope to
focus light what's going on in the
telescope itself and the plan for the
telescope or the explanations of the
telescope's operation
the knowledge is objective in the sense
that it is out there in the object of
the telescope so it is objective in
circles ontological sense or in popper's
world one world of object sense but
this knowledge is doubly objective
because it is objective in seoul's
epistemological sense as well or in
papa's world three sense and this is
because the truth or falsity rightness
or wrongness correctness or
incorrectness of the claims is utterly
independent of anyone's belief about
what's going on or how certain people
are about it or how confident or
whatever other feeling they might have
the theory of the telescope's operation
is true or it's not true
false or not false
in most cases our theories of the world
be they theories of how a telescope
collects and focuses light or how
planets move or species change over time
all these theories explanations these
ideas contain some misconception some
error they can be improved in some way
they do not perfectly capture reality
and for these reasons we can expect all
of them to strictly speaking be
misconceptions false in some way false
in the final analysis but they do
contain some truth they have some useful
information they are useful information
and that useful information means
they are knowledge and because the
information of those explanations is
useful it gets copied it persists it's
resilient or as david deutscher's put it
knowledge is that information that
once it is instantiated somewhere in a
physical substrate it tends to cause
itself to remain so
why because it's useful it is
information that solves a problem and
all of these ways of putting it what
objective knowledge is are again
independent of what people believe about
it it solves the problem or it does not
it doesn't matter what anyone believes
so the old trope of knowledge being
justified true belief is categorically
false it's not about belief and that's
for true we have already seen it is not
true usually we should expect it to
contain misconceptions and be in the
final analysis false which is why
newton's theory of gravity can be useful
knowledge useful information knowledge
though false and replaced by a better
closer to a correct theory of reality
explanations such as general relativity
have superseded newton's showing that it
is wrong and why and how all other
claims to explain objective knowledge
fall back onto it being about some kind
of belief or some degree of certainty
another feeling people have to be more
or less certain this is why bayesians
for example can never claim to be
understanding objective knowledge
properly yes they will make more or less
true claims yes they will be engaged in
the pursuit of objective knowledge but
they will fall back into an epistemology
an explanation of what they and everyone
else is doing that is entirely
subjective
their priors their prior probabilities
begin somewhere when they claim there is
some probability of some event happening
or some theory being true
that initial guess is generated using
nothing but the knowledge of some
subject matter expert and how do they
generate the original guess by guessing
but how
well here's the problem it's just a
feeling a sense there isn't anything
objective there it is a subjective
feeling but their guess will then
encounter objective reality out there
and from there on in if they are
rational they'll do what popper
explained it's the only thing they can
rationally do what popper explain needs
to be done in order to refine and
improve actual objective knowledge they
will refute their guesses by testing
them against reality and that refutation
is now independent of what they think or
hope their guess will then turn out
false almost always and they'll learn
something it would be remarkable if
their so-called probability which
doesn't really exist in ontological
reality anyway turned out to be exactly
true their prior was exactly true and
while we're on it it won't matter even
if you call your entire worldview
objectivism it won't make your
epistemology more objective than others
if at the heart of things you are still
focusing on certainty degrees of
confidence and belief if you deny that
knowledge is useful information that can
be encoded or instantiated in objects
then your epistemology is not objective
if you deny that theories are true or
false independent of people's beliefs if
you think knowledge is explicitly about
feelings or emotions of some kind you do
not have an objective epistemology call
it whatever new label you like it is an
account of the subjective inner workings
of people's minds and not objective
knowledge it might even be about their
perceptions and deriving things from
people's perceptions but objective
knowledge is a more curious beast than
this
it belongs in truth to poppa's world one
it's a real causal agent in things out
there changing the world but it is also
all of what world three consists of so
it's a strange kind of thing like i have
said i've compared it before to being
like a force of nature not literally of
course i'm just comparing it to a force
of nature but if you try to predict try
to guess what the future is like on the
earth in the distant future or just your
local cosmos or indeed the universe as a
whole if you try and guess what it's
going to be like in a hundred years or a
million years or a billion years you
cannot invoke only purely physical
phenomena hitherto studied by physicists
like nuclear forces and gravity to know
what any of those things from your
backyard to the whole earth to the
cosmos itself will be like in a hundred
or a billion years you need to know what
knowledge will be created what people
will be doing which depends upon their
knowledge because it is that knowledge
that will have the biggest effect on the
evolution of the universe it is
explanations that transform the universe
objective knowledge is what it is but
let us give some of the alternatives
their own voice for a moment and compare
what they imply about objectivity and
knowledge to the actual matter of
objective knowledge let us compare more
parochial visions of knowledge with what
we have come to understand of knowledge
from popper and deutsch
part three
other ideas
almost all other ideas about what
knowledge is and and how and to what
extent it can be objective are related
in some way to the original idea found
in plato that knowledge is justified
true belief
even if knowledge is not defined in this
way there will be elements of certainty
or of belief the subjective standard and
justified the infallible standard i take
issue with all those ideas in my post
seeking truth which you can find on my
website
first let us consider the most in vogue
epistemology at the moment that goes by
the name
bayesian epistemology there is a website
called less wrong and less wrong is the
go-to website for bayesianism at least
for a broad brush understanding of it no
lesser an academic than stephen pinker
in his book rationality defers in a
sense to the articles in less wrong and
everything he says in his book there
basically accords with what is said on
the website less wrong let's quote what
they say in one of their articles they
say quote the core claim behind all
varieties of bayesianism is that
probabilities are subjective degrees of
belief often operationalized as
willingness to bet end quote okay so
there we have it now to be fair the word
knowledge doesn't even appear there but
the central idea can't be ignored
bayesianism is something to do with
probability and something to do with
subjective interpretations
very well we're not getting objectivity
but in another article on les wrong by
kaj sotola which is titled what is
bayesianism we read something called
core tenant one and i'll quote what core
tenant one is quote any given
observation has many different possible
causes end quote we might quibble over
whether any given observation has one
possible cause but we may have many
different possible guesses about the one
possible cause so there might already be
some ambiguity or confusion about
knowing some cause and the cause in
itself whatever the case is we go on to
read in the article quote
suppose you had to choose between two
competing scientific theories about the
motion of planets a theory about the
laws of physics governing the motion of
planets devised by sir isaac newton or a
theory simply stating that the flying
spaghetti monster pushes the planets
forward with his noodly appendage
if these theories made the same
predictions you'd have to depend on your
prior knowledge your prior for short to
judge which one was more likely and even
if they didn't make the same predictions
you'd need some prior knowledge which
told you which of the predictions were
better or that the predictions matter in
the first place as opposed to say
theoretical elegance end quote so
firstly notice that the author calls
both of these competing scientific
theories
of course the flying spaghetti monster
is not a scientific theory it makes no
testable claims it is a bad explanation
because it's too easy to vary
why is it a flying spaghetti monster not
a noodle monster or a fettuccine monster
or not a monster at all but an angel and
so on ad infinitum it's too easy to vary
what is it referring to in reality
that's actually causing the
gravitational effect and what is said
there is that we all have to depend on
our prior to judge which is more likely
no
it seems we simply rule one out as a bad
explanation we never have to say newtons
is more likely the fact is
newton's given that choice is the only
explanation the other is a
non-explanation and gives us no useful
information and in fact in reality of
course and let's talk about reality
we're talking about accurate predictions
which no other random theory can give us
to get accurate predictions about the
world we need to have an accurate
explanation to some extent about the
world and as for some prior probability
well forget it it's not probably correct
it's false but this is bayesianism as
its adherents express it as the very
same article goes on to say in core
tenant 3 quote
we can use the concept of probability to
measure our subjective belief in
something furthermore we can apply the
mathematical laws regarding probability
to choosing between different beliefs
if we want our beliefs to be correct we
must do so end quote again what is the
probability of newton's theory of
gravity being correct
well it's zero as eddington's experiment
shows
should we believe it
no we should not it's false but we can
use it and we can call it knowledge the
theory is useful as well as false
independent of any subjective claim we
make this is all objective it
objectively works to some degree of
accuracy it objectively fails in some
situations knowledge is not about belief
knowledge can be false as well as
contain truth there's no problem of
logic here by the way this is logical if
i have a logical conjunction of two
claims a which is true and b which is
false then the logical conjunction a and
b
is strictly logically false but it
contains some truth namely the truth
it's in a which is what we are saying
about newton's theory and what we
presume is the case for all theories all
knowledge they contain some truth and
the more truth they contain the better
they represent and explain reality and
the more problems they solve but even
one iota of falsehood logically makes
the whole thing false but there are
degrees of falsity but that one iota we
should expect in every theory and that
means we should expect all of our
knowledge to contain misconceptions but
that doesn't make it any less useful and
closer to representing reality
so much for bayesianism i have spent
much time explaining elsewhere why
bayesianism is nothing but induction in
a cheap tuxedo it is false but it does
contain some truth but unlike popper's
critical rationalism in other words
unlike actual objective epistemology
about objective knowledge it is much
further away from the truth it is a
worse explanation of epistemology and
how knowledge grows it contains very
great misconceptions we cannot measure
truth we cannot objectively determine
the subjective beliefs about
probabilities in the first place that's
a category error because you're simply
pretending that your prior probability
is objective but it's not it's your own
subjective guess about the subjective
belief you have you don't even
understand what your true beliefs are
this is one of the great misconceptions
that bayesianism also has as if you have
privileged access to understanding what
you think the probability of a
particular belief is that you have it's
like those cosmologists who claim they
will give you a probability of us living
in a cosmological multiverse a
multiverse of multiverses where other
universes have different physical laws
some might say it's a 99 chance others
might say it's a 1 chance how did they
arrive at that number not by calculating
they just
feel it it's purely subjective
now presenting it as objective well
there is a word besides dubious that we
might want to use here but i'll stick
with being polite
so because their starting point is
purely subjective just because someone
else comes along and says we should
update our priors that we live in a
cosmological multiverse because someone
has just observed the inexplicable
somewhere like let's say an apparent
variation in the strength of the fine
structure constant it is no reason to
take any of these probabilities
seriously as science science is not
about subjective belief it is about
objective knowledge so we can reject
bayesianism as not objective not really
about knowledge but rather about at best
beliefs and that's by their own
insistence and failing to account for
how science rationality or anything else
much works objectivism on rand's
philosophy objectivism contains much
that is useful and worth understanding
not least are the defense of capitalism
and trade how wealth is generated is
captured in part by rand but importantly
the morality of free trade is defended
and explained accurately
the idea of defending human life and in
particular having a stance that your own
life is the most valuable thing in your
life and should be taken seriously is a
central tenet of rand's clear-sighted
vision of reality
however the epistemology is entirely
misconceived unfortunately for those who
follow in the tradition of rand where
many of us who follow in the tradition
of papa can recognise the virtue of
iran's ethics and the virtue of iran's
economics and politics at least to some
extent the reverse is really the case
it's rare to encounter an objectivist
who will admit to the charge that there
is little that is objective about the
vision of knowledge that rand has when
compared to popper
very few of them have read papa and i've
talked to them
let us read rand in her own words
briefly firstly from her co-authored
book
titled an introduction to objectivist
epistemology and here
she and leonard pick off the other
author writes quote
the concept of knowledge is formed by
retaining its distinguishing
characteristics a mental grasp of facts
of reality reached either by perceptual
observation or by a process of reason
based on perceptual observation and
omitting the particular facts involved
end quote from page 40 of that
particular work here she is clearly in
an empiricist mindset and in fact she
remains an empirical mindset throughout
her philosophy
but we cannot grasp facts of reality by
perceptual observation we do not
perceive for example nuclear fusion
going on in the core of stars
we conjecture it we have no hope of ever
observing it we have no hope of
perceiving that
now this is not independent of
observation but the function of
observation is to decide
between theory's guests later she goes
on to say and this is on page 60 of that
work quote
axioms are usually considered to be
propositions identifying a fundamental
self-evident truth but explicit
propositions as such are not primaries
they are made of concepts the base of
man's knowledge of all other concepts
all axioms propositions and thought
consists of axiomatic concepts an
axiomatic concept is the identification
of a primary fact of reality which
cannot be analyzed i.e reduced to other
facts or broken into component parts
it is implicit in all facts and all
knowledge it is the fundamentally given
and directly perceived or experienced
which requires no proof or explanation
but on which all proofs and explanations
rest end quote so again we have this
misconception of directly perceived
whatever that means as if humans can be
infallible but we cannot directly
perceive
we interpret perceptions we do not begin
with perceptions but interpretations of
perceptions and they can always be wrong
because by nature they're
interpretations and we can reinterpret
things for instance as i've mentioned
before through any two points a single
straight line can be drawn
that seems like a self-evident truth
just try it yourself it's directly
perceived and so on but it's completely
false
and it's shown to be completely false by
drawing it all over again on a curved
surface language is ambiguous and much
of our knowledge is accessed through how
we understand what language is telling
us about reality not all of it but at
least some of it so this idea of direct
perception is mediated by us
understanding what we mean when we try
to come to understand these things in
terms of the phrase objective knowledge
by the way
it appears in that book an introduction
to objectivist epistemology the phrase
objective knowledge appears only once
and it appears in the following passage
let me read it quote
such is the current condition of
philosophy if in recent decades there
has been an enormous brain drain from
the humanities with the best minds
seeking escape and objective knowledge
in the physical sciences as demonstrated
by the dearth of great names or
achievements in the humanities one need
look no further for its causes end quote
so
she does not focus on objective
knowledge at all or explain
why knowledge is objective or anything
like that and this is in her own book
serving as an introduction to
objectivist epistemology and that's
bizarre there's nothing really about
objective knowledge or what makes it
objective and so on
now i like much of rand for example that
very passage there about the brain drain
from the humanities let's look at what
prompted it the immediate prior
paragraph reads quote
as reporters linguistic analysts were
accurate
wittgenstein's theory that a concept
refers to a conglomeration of things
vaguely tied together by a family
resemblance
is a perfect description of the state of
a mind out of focus end quote
which is a wonderful take in accord with
my own and poppa's view of ludwig
wittgenstein
wittgenstein was a massive bad turn in
philosophy and did damage the humanities
by making it seem confusing especially
philosophy and also worse vacuous by
describing it as just a bunch of word
games so lay the blame for the state of
academic philosophy amongst other people
and the state of the humanities at the
feet of ludwig wittgenstein and if we
can do that the objectivists and the
people who follow in the tradition of
poppa then we're all on the same team
something i wish the objectivists saw
more often in another of rand's books
which is titled for the new intellectual
the phrase objective knowledge never
comes up objective reality comes up
which is a far easier thesis to defend
we are all on the same side against the
relativists in defending the existence
of objective reality but in this book
for the new intellectual
let me read a short passage that
illustrates rand's other major
misconception about knowledge that crops
up in
almost all of her books that passage
reads
quote to negate a man's mind it is the
conceptual level of his consciousness
that has to be invalidated
under all the tortuous complexities
contradictions equivocations
rationalizations of the post-renaissance
philosophy the one consistent line the
fundamental that explains the rest is a
concerted attack on man's conceptual
faculty
most philosophers did not intend to
invalidate conceptual knowledge but its
defenders did more to destroy it than
its enemies they were unable to offer a
solution to the problem of universals
that is to define the nature and source
of abstractions to determine the
relationship of concepts to perceptual
data and to prove the validity of
scientific induction
ignoring the leader of aristotle who had
not left them a full answer to the
problem but had shown the direction
and the method by which the answer could
be found the philosophers were unable to
refute the witch doctor's claim that
their concepts were as arbitrary as his
whims and that their scientific
knowledge had no greater metaphysical
validity than his revelations end quote
in other words rand and i've made this
point before sees knowledge as being
produced in only two methods by
deduction and induction and she has no
truck with anyone who objects to this
she demands induction be the solution to
how universal claims are made but
induction is false
from no finite set of observations
can we demonstrate that a universal
claim holds she never grapples in any of
her work with how it is that scientific
induction is actually valid
because it's not
the way universal claims are made
is that they are conjectured they are
created by the minds of scientists and
here's the key here is why that is not
like the witch doctors here is why it is
not arbitrary and does not lack
metaphysical validity as she said
it is because those guesses those claims
about reality are tested against reality
against physical reality and when they
survive refutation and are the only
known explanation of the phenomena then
we know
we've learned something we have created
and then tested the claim or the theory
or the explanation against reality and
this process has generated
objective knowledge
unfortunately rand rarely refers to
problems in actual science she really
begins there unlike papa who does and so
the epistemology goes wrong because
she's not focused on examples of what's
really happening in physical reality in
science it's all being talked about in
the abstract and that's a weakness of
rand's philosophy especially her
philosophy of science if it can be
called that and her epistemology
conclusions only poppa augmented by the
work of david deutch has a refined
epistemology of objective knowledge
bayesianism endorses subjectivism
explicitly it says claims are probably
true and the probabilities are generated
by subjective feelings but we know that
error is ubiquitous and therefore every
claim will contain some amount of
falsehood making the entire claim
strictly false
explanations are always conjectural and
we rarely have competing explanations
anyway we're lucky to have an
explanation and when we have two we can
do a crucial test to rule out one of
them leaving us with only one
objectivism despite the name is not a
theory of objective knowledge it too is
subjectivist it's about perceptions
mainly empiricism the contents of
sensations within the minds of
individuals nothing is ever made of
knowledge being instantiated in objects
which it is too much stock is put into
the misconception of induction we do not
generalize from observations we explain
observations we begin with guesses
tested against objective reality some
guesses survive this process and we have
an evolution of knowledge therefore
towards claims that more accurately
represent or model or explain reality
but these models are never final just as
evolution has no end there is just more
and more improvement knowledge is
objective because it can be found in
objects knowledge is useful information
the dna contains useful information for
how a gene can survive and how an
organism can persist in a given
environment explanatory knowledge
contains useful information for example
of how to make transistors that
knowledge solves a problem of how to
store and process information because
knowledge is information that solves a
problem that makes it useful and because
it is useful it tends to get copied it
is the information that gets copied
that's what knowledge is information
that gets replicated copied and passed
on
unlike the rest that is deleted and
discarded we say that knowledge is
resilient it persists over time it is
the information that once instantiated
in a physical substrate tends to cause
itself to remain so
that means it is very much out there in
the physical world it's not all in our
minds
that is objective knowledge being out
there in the real physical world indeed
it is hard to imagine an epistemology
more objective than that but following
in the tradition of papa i also actually
do imagine there will be improvements on
this vision yet to come
but it won't be by introducing
probabilities subjective feelings or the
misconceptions of empiricism and
induction back into the picture we've
refuted all that it will be by
understanding the truth of the cosmic
significance of knowledge more deeply
we know now what we can rule out about
knowledge but there is still far more
left to discover
[Music]
um
foreign
[Music]